I am working on producing a set of synthetic data of subqueries through 
graph traversal of a local filesystem. The directory stores facts about
entities, their properties, and relationships to other entities. 

0. Construction of the Facts Knowledge Graph
==============================

0.1. Data Source
----------------

The data source is produced by recursively querying LLM about properties and
relationship to other entities. Even though there might be some hallucinations
in the data, the data is still useful for the purpose of this project.

The prompt is [[PROMPT-entity_properties_relationship-extraction.md]] and 
The LLM is gemma3:12b through `ollama-python` binding.

0.2. Generation the Data
------------------------

The data is generated by the following steps:

1. Randomly ask LLM for "The Lord of the Rings". The response looks like this:

```json
{
  "entity": "The Lord of the Rings",
  "properties": {
    "author": "J. R. R. Tolkien",
    "genre": "High fantasy",
  },
  "relationship": [
    {"prequel": "The Hobbit"},
    {"major_event": "War of the Ring"},
    {"has_part": "The Fellowship of the Ring"}
  ]
}```
2. Store the entity and properties into facts/{entity-name}.json file.
3. Go through each of the related entities and repeat the process from 1.

To query the knowledge graph, we navigate throught the files under the `facts`
directory.

Now that we have the knowledge graph, we can start generating subqueries.

1. Generation Algorithm
====================

1.1. Foundation - Triple Query
-------------------------
Here is the rough outline of how I might approach this

1. Randomly choose an entity from 
2. Query the entity for its properties and qualifiers 
3. Pick a random property and qualifier from the entity
4. Use the properties and qualifiers to generate a query

For example:

1. Randomly choose Nikola Tesla
2. Query Nikola Tesla for its properties and qualifiers and pick the following:
    - lifespan (dbp:birthDate, dbp:deathDate)
    - birth place (dbp:birthPlace)

Queries:
- Nikola Tesla lifespan
- Nikola Tesla birth place


1.2. Chain of questions
------------------

Here we try to navigate through the graph to create a chain of queries. Building up from the previous workflow.

4. Randomly choose a relationship `dbr`: from the previous entity (e.g. dbr:Smiljan)
5. Use the entity to repeat step 2 and 3 as described in section 1.1.
6. Form a chain of 2-5 queries.

For example

3. Nikla Tesla birth place
4. Smiljan -> Notable people born in Smiljan
5. Ferdinand Kovačević -> Invention
6. Telegraphy

Query chain:

- Nikola Tesla birth place
  Notable people born in birth place
  Inventor of telegraphy


1.3. Comparison 
--------------------------

Based on the "Simplest Query" section, we can also introduce a comparison of
the results from shared properties and qualifiers.

For example, the following subqeries can be generated for the question: "Who
lives longer? Nikola Tesla or Ferdinand Kovačević"

- Nikola Tesla lifespan
- Ferdinand Kovačević lifespan


1.4. Query Composition
-----------------

Further, the comparison can be extended to a list of items.

Use a randomly selected property to produce a set of queries that cover all
available properties in a specific subdomain.

For example, the following subqueries can be generated for the question: "of
all the inventions by Tesla, which one came the earliest?"

- Year of Tesla invented Induction motor
- Year of Tesla invented Tesla Coil
- Year of Tesla invented AC system design
- Year of Tesla invented Wireless Communication
- Year of Tesla invented Remote Control drone
- Year of Tesla invented Neon and Flourescent lighting
- Year of Tesla invented Tesla Turbine
- Year of Tesla invented Tesla Valve
- Year of Tesla invented Tesla Osciillator

2. Key Rules for Queries
=========================

Make sure the following rules are carefully followed:

1. question is as concise as possible.
2. align with WikiData ontology
3. avoid ambiguity and comparatives
4. prioritize specificity
5. join subqueries into a single line, separated by \n
